## Project Structure

A typical Scala-Forklift project is consist of several sub-projects, as shown in this tutorial. They are:

- `app` is where your application code resides.
- `migrations` stores all the migration scripts, and the tools to preview and apply migrations.
- `migration_manager` is where customized migration manager is defined. There is also a tool to run some rescue commands, in case your code in `migrations` cannot be run or compiled.
- `generated_code` is where the code generated by Slick Code Generator is stored. You should NOT modify or edit code in this sub-project.
- `tools` is to provide other convenient tools. For now, there's only a tool to help users work with git.

## A Quick Walkthrough

Project `migrations` contains the migration scripts and tools to apply these scripts. Simply launch `sbt` shell and enter:

    migrations/run

This will gives you a list of available commands. Since this command could be used a lot during development, we have defined a shortcut in `build.sbt`:

    addCommandAlias("mg", "migrations/run")

So you can enter the following command in your `sbt` shell:

    mg init

This is equivalent to `migrations/run init`. This will make your database ready for migrations.

Your migration scripts are stored in directory `migrations/src_migrations/main/scala`, with the file named by numbers. For example, `1.scala` creates the table `users`:

    object M1 {
      MyMigrations.migrations = MyMigrations.migrations :+ SqlMigration(1)(List(
        sqlu"""create table "users" ("id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,"first" VARCHAR NOT NULL,"last" VARCHAR NOT NULL)"""
      ))
    }

Both SQL queries and Slick statements can be used in a migration. Details will be discussed in the next section. For now, let's just apply these migrations by entering the following command in your `sbt` shell:

    ~mg migrate

This command will find all the not yet applied migrations, and try to apply them to your database. You should be able to see the following 3 migrations applied.

    1 SqlMigration:
	    [create table "users" ("id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,"first" VARCHAR NOT NULL,"last" VARCHAR NOT NULL)]

    2 GenericMigration:
        slick.driver.H2Driver.api.queryInsertActionExtensionMethods[datamodel.v1.schema.tables.Users#TableElementType, Seq](Users).++=(collection.Seq[datamodel.v1.schema.tables.UsersRow](UsersRow(1, "Chris", "Vogt"), UsersRow(2, "Stefan", "Zeiger")))

    3 SqlMigration:
	    [alter table "users" alter column "first" rename to "firstname" ]
	    [alter table "users" alter column "last" rename to "lastname" ]

Alternatively, you can also use `~mg migrate -p` to have Scala-Forklift ask for your confirmation before actually applying the migrations.

Congratulations! You have applied all the migration scripts. To see what's in current database, uncomment the code in `example/src/main/scala/App.scala` and enter the following command in your `sbt` shell:

    app/run

You should be able to see something similar to this in the output:

    Users in the database:
    UsersRow(1,Chris,Vogt)
    UsersRow(2,Yao,Li)

## Migrations

The migrations are stored in the `src_migrations` directory in the `migrations` sub-project. You can use `mg new s` (for SQL migrations) or `mg new d` (for Slick migrations) to create a new migration file.

To apply these migrations, you must first copy them to the `src` directory. Entering `mg update` in your `sbt` shell will first unapplied migration files to the `src` directory. Then you can use `mg preview` to preview the migrations going to be applied, and `mg apply` to actually apply them.

The applied migrations could change the database schemas. In Scala-Forklift, it is recommended to use the source code generator (which uses the Slick source code generator) to generate the Scala model for you. Command `mg codegen` will generate the models for the latest database. The generated code resides in the `generated_code` sub-project.

However, using these commands in order for every migration could be unpleasant. Scala-Forklift provides a shortcut command `~mg migrate`, which will run `update`, `preview`, `apply`, and `codegen` subsequently for you. In practice, it is recommended that you ALWAYS use `~mg migrate`.

A migration can be written in plain SQL or Slick queries.

### SQL Migrations

You can use `mg new s` to create a new SQL migration in your `src_migrations` directory.

By using the `sqlu` interpolator in Slick you can write plain SQL queries in your migrations, as shown in `1.scala`:

    object M1 {
      MyMigrations.migrations = MyMigrations.migrations :+ SqlMigration(1)(List(
        sqlu"""create table "users" ("id" INTEGER NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,"first" VARCHAR NOT NULL,"last" VARCHAR NOT NULL)"""
      ))
    }

### Slick Migrations

Comparing with plain SQL queries, Slick queries are type-safe.

You can use `mg new d` to create a new Slick migration in your `src_migrations` directory.

A Slick migration can use the models generated by a previous migration. By convention, you should ALWAYS use code generated for the previous migration. For example, use `datamodel.v1.schema.tables.Users` in your `2.scala`:

    import slick.driver.H2Driver.api._
    import com.liyaos.forklift.slick.GenericMigration
    import datamodel.v1.schema.tables.Users
    import datamodel.v1.schema.tables.UsersRow

    object M2 {
      MyMigrations.migrations = MyMigrations.migrations :+ GenericMigration(2)(
        DBIO.seq(Users ++= Seq(
          UsersRow(1, "Chris","Vogt"),
          UsersRow(2, "Yao","Li")
        )))
    }

## Migration Manager

In project `migration_manager`, you can define your own migration manager and code generator.

Scala-Forklift provides a `SlickMigrationManager` to manage your slick migration scripts. To use `SlickMigrationManager`, add the following library dependency to your `build.sbt` in this project.

    libraryDependencies += "com.liyaos" %% "scala-forklift-slick" % "1.0-SNAPSHOT"

Then you can override original methods or define new methods for your migration manager here:

    import com.liyaos.forklift.core.Migration
    import com.liyaos.forklift.slick.SlickMigrationManager

    trait MyMigrationManager extends SlickMigrationManager {
      // define your methods or override original methods here
    }

### Code Generator

Scala-Forklift for Slick provides a wrapper for Slick source code generator. You can also customize it in your `migration_manager` sub-project:

    trait MyCodegen extends SlickCodegen {
      // change directory of generated file options here
      // override val generatedDir = ...
      // override val container = ...
      // override val fileName = ...
    }

## Git Tool

Scala-Forklift provides a git tool to help you manage your dev db with git. Check [here](/tools/git) for a detailed explanation.

## Application

Your application code in `app` sub-project should look exactly like your other application code does not use Scala-Forklift, except that it does not contain the Scala code for your database models, but depends on the code generated by a source code generator (which is also a good practice when using Slick). Your application should depend on the `generated_code` sub-project, and import these models from `datamodel.latest.schema.tables`.
